JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
Senate Democrats end a nearly
15-hour filibuster
early this morning in a push for
gun control,
four days after the Orlando
shooting.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Thursday,
we sit down with three survivors
of the Orlando
attack to hear their stories of
that harrowing
night inside the Pulse
nightclub.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with the
Olympic Games
in Brazil around the corner,
fears of Zika
grip both athletes and tourists
-- how residents
are reacting.
POLLYANA RABELLO, Mother of
Child with Microcephaly
(through translator): If our
country is unable
support its own people, who are
Brazilians,
who pay taxes, why bring others
if you can't
even support these people?
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: This was a day
when President
Obama joined the mourning in
Orlando, as a
shocking new killing shook
England. The president
traveled to Florida to console
survivors and
families of the 49 murdered
Sunday at a gay
nightclub. And he met with
police and first-responders.
Afterward, Mr. Obama and Vice
President Biden
left flowers at a makeshift
memorial, and
spoke with reporters.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Today, once again, as has been
true too many
times before, I held and hugged
grieving family
members and parents, and they
asked, why does
this keep happening? And they
pleaded that
we do more to stop the carnage.
They don't
care about the politics. Neither
do I.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But a leading
Republican caused
a stir today when he initially
charged the
president bears the blame for
the nightclub
killings.
Arizona Senator John McCain told
reporters:
"Barack Obama is directly
responsible for
it because his decision to pull
all U.S. troops
out of Iraq led to the rise of
ISIS."
Later, McCain said he misspoke,
and didn't
mean to imply the president was
personally
responsible for Orlando.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Britain was
stunned today
when a member of Parliament was
shot dead
in her own district. Labor Party
M.P. Jo Cox
had campaigned to keep Britain
in the European
Union. She was killed in the
small town of
Birstall, near Leeds, in
Northern England.
Griff Witte is London bureau
chief for The
Washington Post, joins us now.
Griff, for an American frame of
reference,
there might be people who think
about this
like the Gabby Giffords shooting
or attack
that happened a few years ago
here. Who was
Jo Cox?
GRIFF WITTE, The Washington
Post: Jo Cox was
someone who was widely respected
on all sides
of the political debate in
Britain. She was
someone who had been a human
rights campaigner
before she became a member of
Parliament.
She was elected to Parliament
last year as
a member of the center-left
Labor Party, and
she was seen as someone with a
really extraordinarily
bright future in politics.
David Cameron today called her a
rising star.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And there were
several different
narratives that were swirling.
What happened
on the scene around the attack?
GRIFF WITTE: Well, what we
understand is that
Jo Cox was meeting with
constituents at a
library in this small town,
which is something
that she does every Thursday
afternoon, and
she was walking out of the
building, and she
was approached on the sidewalk
by a 52-year-old
man who began stabbing her. A
passerby tried
to intervene, tried to stop the
attack, and
the attacker then pulled out a
gun.
It's believed to have been
perhaps an antique
weapon. Firearms are very
tightly regulated
here in the U.K., and he began
to shoot her.
And shot her at least two times,
perhaps three
times. And she died about an
hour later.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Griff Witte,
we also heard
that the shooter or the
assailant had yelled
"Britain first." Besides being a
slogan, it's
also the name of a far-right
party. And this
comes in the context of this
much, much larger
conversation about the Brexit
right now.
GRIFF WITTE: Right.
And I want to stress that it's
not clear that
this man has any kind of
relationship with
Britain First, which is an
organization that
is on the far, far right here in
the U.K.
It is an anti-immigrant,
anti-Muslim organization
that does very provocative
demonstrations
across British.
The organization says it has no
affiliation
with the assailant here and has
condemned
his actions. Nonetheless,
witnesses have said
that he yelled "Britain first"
as he was engaging
the attack and afterward. And so
that has
led to speculation that he has
had -- he has
some kind of political motives.
Family members, however, say
that they don't
know him to be someone who had
any kind of
political affiliations at all or
strong political
views, but they say that he was
mentally troubled.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
Griff Witte of
The Washington Post joining us
from London,
thanks so much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Search
crews in the Mediterranean have
recovered
the cockpit voice recorder from
the EgyptAir
plane that crashed last month.
The flight
disappeared between Crete and
the Egyptian
coast, killing all 66 people on
board.
Investigators say the voice
recorder was damaged,
but its memory unit is still
intact. They're
working to see if it sheds light
on what caused
the crash.
HARI SREENIVASAN: CIA Director
John Brennan
warned today that the Islamic
State group
is trying to send operatives
into the West
to carry out new attacks.
Brennan told the
Senate Intelligence Committee
that the militants
hope high-profile attacks will
compensate
for territory they have lost in
Iraq and Syria.
JOHN BRENNAN, CIA Director: ISIL
has a large
cadre of Western fighters who
could potentially
serve as operatives for attacks
in the West.
And the group is probably
exploring a variety
of means for infiltrating
operatives into
the West, including in refugee
flows, smuggling
routes and legitimate methods of
travel.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The gunman in
the Orlando
killings claimed allegiance to
the Islamic
State, but Brennan said today
the CIA has
found no actual connection.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Swathes of
downtown Saint Louis
had no electrical power, and no
air conditioning,
for much of this day, as the
heat headed toward
100 degrees. The cause was an
overnight fire
inside a manhole. Last night,
smoke could
be seen billowing from
underground. City hall,
courts and other administrative
buildings
closed for the day.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Philadelphia
is now the
first major American city to
adopt a tax on
carbonated drinks. City council
today gave
final approval to a levy of 1.5
cents per
ounce for sugary and diet sodas.
The beverage
industry had waged a
multimillion-dollar campaign
to block the measure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A late-day rally
lifted Wall
Street after five days of
losses. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
nearly 93
points to close at 17733. The
Nasdaq rose
10 points, and the S&P 500 added
six.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And Walt
Disney opened Shanghai
Disneyland today, its first
theme park in
mainland China. The opening
ceremony featured
Communist Party leaders and
familiar characters.
Officials held up the park as a
symbol of
U.S.-China relations. It's
valued at $5.5
billion.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a senator's
15-hour filibuster, could it
change the gun
control debate?; making economic
sense of
Britain's vote to leave or stay
in the E.U.;
the Navy's new approach to PTSD;
first-hand
accounts from survivors of the
Orlando shooting;
and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The debate over
gun control
took center stage in the U.S.
Senate for nearly
15 hours, as Democrats pushed
for votes on
measures they say could help
prevent another
mass shooting.
Senate Minority Leader Harry
Reid confirmed
this morning that Republicans
will allow votes
on gun control amendments to a
larger money
bill. But he complained it's not
at all clear
they can pass.
SEN. HARRY REID (D-NV), Minority
Leader: Republicans
must join us for those measures
to pass. But
that won't happen if Republicans
continue
to take their orders -- and I
mean orders
-- from the National Rifle
Association and
the Gun Owners of America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Majority Leader
Mitch McConnell
had a ready answer, that
Democrats played
politics yesterday while the FBI
briefed senators
on Orlando.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
Senate Republicans attended, and
asked serious
questions. A rather significant
group of Senate
Democrats skipped it, skipped
the briefing
altogether, for a campaign
talk-a-thon out
here on the Senate floor, which
also prevented
us from going forward on the
bill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Connecticut
Democrat Chris
Murphy spearheaded the
filibuster that ran
nearly 15 hours, until early
this morning.
He evoked the 2012 massacre at a
school in
Newtown, Connecticut, and a
teacher who shielded
a child.
SEN. CHRIS MURPHY (D),
Connecticut: It takes
courage to look into the eye of
a shooter,
instead of running, wrapping
your arms around
a 6-year-old boy and accepting
death for a
little boy under your charge.
Ask yourself,
what can you do to make sure
that Orlando
or Sandy Hook never, ever
happens again?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Murphy wants a
vote on barring
gun sales to those on a terror
watch list.
He drew support from a number of
fellow Democrats.
Republican Pat Toomey of
Pennsylvania also
spoke up.
SEN. PAT TOOMEY (R),
Pennsylvania: I'm of
the view that it's time to get
something done
here. What I think we need to do
here is do
everything we can to make sure
that terrorists
are not able to buy guns, at
least not legally.
But we also need to have a
meaningful mechanism
for people to challenge their
status of being
that list, and that's what we
haven't put
together here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A GOP alternative
calls for
not barring gun sales, but
delaying them by
72 hours, for anyone on the
watch list.
This afternoon, the Senate's
number two Republican,
John Cornyn, said the Senate
will vote on
four gun-related measures on
Monday.
Joining me now is one of the
more than 20
Democratic senators who took
part in last
night's filibuster, Senator Al
Franken of
Minnesota.
Senator, thank you for joining
us.
Given the implacable opposition
of virtually
every Republican in the Senate,
what do you
think this filibuster
accomplished?
SEN. AL FRANKEN (D), Minnesota:
Well, I hope
it changed the conversation, in
light of the
just horrific events -- event in
Orlando,
the worst mass shooting in our
country's history.
Chris Murphy represented Newtown
when he was
in the House of Representatives,
and said
how difficult it is for him to
talk to the
families of the kids who died
there in that
shooting and tell them that,
four years later,
nothing has happened.
And I think that -- I commend
Chris Murphy
for doing this. And I think it
changed the
conversation. And that's why
we're having
these votes. We're going to have
these votes
on Monday. And I think anything
that we can
do to stop one of these events
is a good thing.
And Dianne Feinstein is putting
forward a
bill that will take people who
are on the
terror watch list and make it so
they're not
able to buy a gun.
And Chris Murphy has offered
legislation to
close the loopholes and the
background checks
at gun shows and online, because
anyone who
is on a terror watch list, if
they get turned
down at a gun store, they can
just right now
go online or go to a gun show.
And we have got to do everything
we can to
prevent something like this
happening. We're
not going to get all of them,
but any one
that we can stop, we must do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator,
I'm sure you
know Republicans are arguing.
They have got
their own arguments on every one
of these
proposals. On the terror watch
list proposal,
they say, well -- they still
think that, since
-- or they argue that buying a
gun is a constitutional
right.
And even for someone who is on a
terror watch
list, maybe there's a short
delay, but you
still have to give that person
an opportunity
to buy a gun at some point.
SEN. AL FRANKEN: Well, you know,
we can -- we
should be talking about how to
do this.
But talking about a three-day
delay, I don't
think makes sense. The GAO just
came out with
a report that says that people
on the no-fly
list, 91 percent of them were
able to buy
guns at gun stores. The ones
that were turned
down, they weren't denied
because they were
on the terror watch list. They
were denied
for some other reason.
We have to make sure that people
who shouldn't
have guns do not have guns. That
is a priority.
And, yes, if you want to
adjudicate somebody
who is wrongly on the list, that
should be
done, but it shouldn't be done
in three days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, what
makes you think
a compromise can be worked out
now, when even
when the Democrats were in the
majority in
the Senate, after the Newtown
school shooting,
they were not able to enact
significant legislation
on guns?
SEN. AL FRANKEN: One, we came
very close then.
And, two, I think this terror
watch list is
a different issue. And I think
that what we
saw in this filibuster last
night and the
reaction of people to it around
the country,
I think that my Republican
colleagues who
are certainly up for reelection
-- you see
it with Donald Trump, whose
response to this
has been, you know, in many ways
terrible,
is seeing -- he's running for
president.
He sees that, you know, 80
percent of Republicans
are for these measures, and 80
-- some 87
percent of the American people
are for that.
So I hope that my colleagues
understand that
this is just the right thing to
do, and that
they will not give into the
pressure from
the NRA.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even if the
Senate were the
pass some language, Senator, we
have every
expectation that the House
wouldn't. So is
this just then an exercise in
what?
SEN. AL FRANKEN: This is an
exercise in trying
to prevent these from happening.
That's what this is. And there
has been movement
on this issue because of this
horrific event.
And I believe that's being felt
in the Senate
and in the House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you do believe
next week
we may see some of -- one or
more of these
proposals pass the Senate?
SEN. AL FRANKEN: I hope so. I
don't know what
Senator Cornyn's proposal is. I
don't know
what Senator Grassley's proposal
is. But you
will notice that we are getting
proposals
from them now.
Now, they may have -- they may
be like we
have seen before, with poison
pills or something
like that. But I think the
conversation has
changed in the wake of this
horrific event.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Al
Franken of Minnesota,
we thank you very much.
SEN. AL FRANKEN: Thank you,
Judy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As we heard,
Britain was
stunned today by the killing of
a member of
Parliament. Jo Cox was a strong
supporter
of saying the country should
stay in the European
Union.
In one week, Britain votes on
that very question.
Both sides in the argument
suspended their
campaigns today out of respect.
Before the latest, our economics
correspondent
Paul Solman was in Oxford
hearing the arguments.
Tonight, the case for leaving
the E.U.
It's part of his Making Sense
series, which
appears every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: The Oxford Union,
perhaps the
world's most famous debating
society.
ALEX SALMOND, First Minister of
Scotland:
Mr. President, I am delighted to
be here at
the Oxford Union, the pinnacle
of university
debating in England.
PAUL SOLMAN: Capping off the
spring term last
week, the year's most hotly
anticipated debate,
the E.U. referendum, better
known as Brexit,
British exit from the European
Union, coming
up for a real vote one week from
today.
MICHAEL HOWARD, Former
Conservative Party
Leader: We have a long and
illustrious tradition
of democratic self-government.
We are as entitled
to rule ourselves as are the
people of the
United States of America. This
is your birthright.
This is your heritage. This is
your future.
Reclaim it and vote leave.
(APPLAUSE)
ALEX SALMOND: Let's make the
case for immigration
as a sign of success of this
country, and
let's celebrate the magnificent
achievement
of those who've come.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is Mansfield,
one of Oxford's
38 colleges, where some 400 of
Oxford's 22,000
students live and learn.
Mansfield is known for its
nonconformity,
its openness to students from
all countries
and classes, not just from
upper-crust prep
schools. Small wonder its
faculty want to
remain in the E.U.
WOMAN: Sometimes, I talk to my
colleagues
over lunch, and they cannot
imagine that anybody
would vote leave.
PAUL SOLMAN: But at the entry
point to Mansfield,
Terry Greenwood, who helps run
the Porter's
Lodge, will vote to vamoose.
TERRY GREENWOOD, Mansfield
College: I have
no confidence in the basic
ability or competence
of anybody in the European
Parliament, whatever.
PAUL SOLMAN: But it's going to
cost the United
Kingdom to leave the union, is
it not?
TERRY GREENWOOD: So what? We
should be in
charge of our own country, we,
not some unelected
Parliament. You wouldn't have
your next-door
neighbor come in and tell you
what to eat
at your table. Well, that's
precisely what
the European Union is telling us
to do. It's
telling us how to conduct our
lives.
PAUL SOLMAN: Somerville was one
of Oxford's
first colleges to admit women,
in 1879. Indira
Gandhi lived and learned here.
So did Margaret
Thatcher. The faculty want to
stay in Europe,
but Olga Smith, a so-called
scout who helps
keep house for the current head
of college,
doesn't.
OLGA SMITH, Somerville College:
Well, I think
we have lost control of the
borders.
PAUL SOLMAN: Do you think that
the people
who are coming in are driving
down wages?
OLGA SMITH: The wages and
unemployment, yes,
yes, because there's a lot more
foreign people
doing all that, doing all sorts
of jobs.
DAVID TOWNSEND, Somerville
College: I feel
that we should leave.
PAUL SOLMAN: David Townsend is
assistant gardener.
DAVID TOWNSEND: I have always
regarded myself
as English first, then British.
I have never
regarded myself as European. As
an island
nation, I think it's inborn, I
think.
PAUL SOLMAN: But the Brexit vote
isn't just
a class conflict, town against
gown. Consider
this excerpt from a feature film
gone viral
making the case for leaving.
NARRATOR: We the people are
being cajoled,
frightened, and bullied into
surrendering
our democracy and freedom. This
film is a
rallying cry. We must fight for
our independence,
for the right to determine
ourselves the laws
under which we live, and for the
freedom to
shape our own future.
PAUL SOLMAN: The politician
often compared
to Donald Trump here, former
London Mayor
Boris Johnson, makes the
economic case for
leaving.
BORIS JOHNSON, Former Mayor of
London: Why
are we sending 10 billion pounds
a year net
to Brussels, some of which is
spent, my friends,
you know, some of which is spent
on Spanish
bullfighting?
PAUL SOLMAN: And though almost
half of Oxford
students are foreign-born, a few
are pushing
Brexit vigorously. Harrison
Edmonds is one
of their leaders.
HARRISON EDMONDS, Student: For
Britain to
be viable in the future
economically, it has
to be where the market is. And
the market
increasingly of the next century
is not going
to be in Europe. It's going to
be in Asia.
It's going to be in America.
It's going to
be in South America. It's not
going to be
in Europe. And that's where we
need to be
looking. We need to be looking
outside of
the European Union for those
markets.
PAUL SOLMAN: Meanwhile, says
Peter Saville,
commonwealth nations like
Australia or India
become second-class trading
partners.
PETER SAVILLE, Student: If trade
agreements
localize to one area, that is
effectively
a protection racket. They
disadvantage the
world community towards the
European one,
that accident of geography.
PAUL SOLMAN: But this is a
protectionism racket,
not a protection racket.
Protection racket
is when you extort somebody
because you're
going to hurt them if they don't
do what you
say.
(CROSSTALK)
PETER SAVILLE: If you're a
member of the club,
and you vote to leave that club,
and that
club threatens you to stay
inside, that's
not a group of friends. That is
a protection
racket.
PAUL SOLMAN: And in the end,
says Oliver Shore,
the E.U. will come round and
trade with the
U.K. anyway.
OLIVER SHORE, Student: Can you
really see
Angela Merkel going to all the
German car
manufacturers and saying, look,
you're going
to have to cut your jobs because
Britain's
been bad and we're going to have
to put big
tariffs up and stop you selling
cars to Britain,
and even though I'm a very
unpopular prime
minister in Germany at the
moment, I'm going
to become even more unpopular by
cutting manufacturing
jobs?
PAUL SOLMAN: But the nub of the
argument,
says Sam Slater, is sovereignty.
SAM SLATER, Student: A big point
is about
British elected -- elected
representatives
making our own laws, not the
unelected commission
handing down laws to the kind of
elected European
Parliament, who kind of give
them an agreement,
and then maybe it will become
law. It's rubbish.
PAUL SOLMAN: Case in point, a
Scottish tax
passed a few years ago, in part
to combat
alcoholism.
SAM SLATER: It was passed by the
Scottish
Parliament, which is elected by
the Scottish
people, and they have a mandate
to pass laws,
and it was blocked. It was
blocked by the
European Union because of this
technical standards
directive. What has it got to do
with the
other 27 member states what
Scottish people
want to do in their own country?
It's a disgrace.
It's an utter disgrace.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, disgrace or
not, Scottish
voters turn out to be strongly
in favor of
remaining. And we will explore
that side of
the debate, to remain, in our
next piece.
Until then, reporting from
Oxford, England,
this is economics correspondent
Paul Solman.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to a major
change being
made by the U.S. Navy that will
affect servicemen
suffering from one of the unseen
wounds of
war.
John Yang has that.
JOHN YANG: The wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan
have killed thousands of
American servicemen
and maimed and injured tens of
thousands more,
but some wounds are not as
easily seen or
identified.
Post-traumatic stress disorder,
or PTSD afflicts
as much as one-fifth of Iraq and
Afghanistan
veterans in any given year.
Compounding the
affliction, personnel who were
kicked out
of the military because of
erratic behavior
caused by PTSD, by traumatic
brain injury,
called TBI, or by other mental
health conditions
often lose their benefits,
including access
to veterans health care.
But that will now change for at
least one
of the services, navy personnel,
sailors and
Marines, under a new policy
enacted by Navy
Secretary Ray Mabus.
Secretary Mabus joins us now.
Thank you for joining us.
RAY MABUS, Secretary of the U.S.
Navy: Glad
to be here.
JOHN YANG: Tell us what this new
policy is
and why you made this change.
RAY MABUS: The policy that we
had been operating
under was, if somebody committed
misconduct,
the erratic behavior you were
talking about,
that took preference over
everything else
in terms of a discharge.
And so people would get
discharged with bad
paper, with discharges that
didn't give them
any benefits when they left.
What we have
done with policy that I have
just signed was
to say, if you're being
administratively discharged
for some misconduct, we're going
to take a
look to see if you have got a
diagnosable
condition, to see if you have
got PTSD, to
see if you have got traumatic
brain injury,
and then that will factor in, so
that you
may still be discharged, but you
will be discharged
with benefits, with help that
we're going
to recognize the reason for this
erratic behavior
and give you help after you
leave the military.
And it's not just for combat
injuries, combat
wounds. It's also for things
like sexual assault
that is often followed by PTSD.
JOHN YANG: And just to be clear,
you say that
this conduct took precedence.
In other words, it didn't matter
that the
misconduct may have had an
underlying cause.
RAY MABUS: Right.
The only thing that was looked
at was the
misconduct. And the discharge
was based on
that misconduct without why it
was caused,
without PTSD evaluation, without
TBI evaluation.
And the awful thing was, when
people left
under this circumstance, they
got no benefits.
So, they couldn't get into
veterans health
care. They couldn't get the
assistance they
needed to deal with PTSD or to
deal with traumatic
brain injury. It was a pure
policy issue.
And this is not just for people
being discharged
now, not just for active-duty
people. If you're
a veteran, and you were
discharged and got
bad paper, and so you're not
getting any benefits,
and you believe that it was
caused by in some
way or another PTSD or traumatic
brain injury,
come back. We will take another
look at it.
We will take another run at the
determination
of the discharge. If it is found
by that,
you will be able to get your
benefits, even
if you have been discharged for
a while.
JOHN YANG: Any idea how many men
and women
that could affect?
RAY MABUS: The estimates we have
got on traumatic
brain injury are 46,000 sailors,
49,000 Marines.
That's a lot of people. It's
hard to know,
in terms of why people were
discharged, why
-- what kind of discharges they
got.
This sort of thing, it's hard to
know how
many are going to fit in under
that, but it's
clearly not just a few people.
JOHN YANG: Do you think enough
is being done
for sailors and Marines to
recognize, on the
commanders' part, to recognize
when behavior
may be because of PTSD or
traumatic brain
injury?
RAY MABUS: I think we're making
progress on
that.
The other part of this policy is
that, if
you're going to be discharged
and there's
a possibility you will be
discharged without
benefits, that discharge
decision was moved
way up in the chain of command.
It has got
to be done by an admiral or a
general, a flag
officer, instead of where it
used to be, which
was a unit commander, which
would be lieutenant
colonel, colonel, somewhere
around in there.
JOHN YANG: Mr. Secretary, do you
think the
other services will follow your
lead on this?
RAY MABUS: Well, I certainly
hope so.
And we have had some talks with
the other
services on how we implemented
this and what
the new policy is. And so this
is the right
thing to do.
JOHN YANG: Let me ask you one
more question
about an issue facing the modern
military.
The Pentagon just recently had
their LGBT
pride event.
Secretary Carter said last year
that he would
-- was looking to change the
policy to allow
transgender people to serve in
the military.
That new policy was due five
months ago. Can
you give us any insight into
what the issues
are that are holding this up?
RAY MABUS: I know that the
process is ongoing.
We have participated in the
process in terms
of transgender.
And I think that, from Secretary
Carter's
memo, when he set this out, it's
not if, but
when. It's not if, but how. We
had all expected
the policy before now, but
things take a while
sometimes.
JOHN YANG: Very good.
Secretary Ray Mabus, thank you
for being with
us.
RAY MABUS: Appreciate it, John.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
U.N. official
explains why it's so hard to
solve the refugee
crisis; Brazil combats
mosquitoes, and Zika,
ahead of the Summer Olympics;
and a Muslim-American
breaks down stereotypes with
comedy.
But, first: As families in
Orlando were preparing
to bury the first victims of the
mass shooting,
the president spoke today of
grief beyond
description. Many in the
community are mourning
for sons, daughters, family and
friends who
were just in their 20s and 30s.
We spent much of this past day
listening to
what survivors and members of
the community
had to say.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The president
and vice president's
visit today comes as the people
of Orlando
are finding different ways of
coping and trying
to recover from this massacre.
DON PRICE, Greenwood Cemetery: I
think it
means a lot. It shows that the
nation is watching.
I think that's the idealism at
that point,
that he's taken time, the
president has taken
time to let everybody know that,
hey, he feels
for them and is watching it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But, for
others, especially
those who witnessed the attack
firsthand inside
the Pulse nightclub, ceremonies
and visits
can only do so much.
Jeanette McCoy drove to the club
Saturday
night and was inside with her
friends Julian
Amador and Yvens Carrenard when
the shooting
began. Another friend shielded
McCoy, taking
a gunshot to the back and
allowing her to
escape. She says her grief has
made it hard
to sleep.
JEANETTE MCCOY, Survivor: We
lost so many
people. We lost a part of us.
People don't
realize. There's people who were
dead, but
the ones that survived, we can't
hold a service
for our heads.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Carrenard
can't shake the
images of what he saw as he
escaped the club.
YVENS CARRENARD, Survivor: I
could hear people
moaning. And I could hear people
screaming
for help. When they came and got
us, I had
to physically walk by bodies. We
had to walk
by the dead bodies that were
just where we
were standing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: McCoy told us
today she
believes the police waited too
long to rush
in, which she says allowed it to
become a
hostage situation.
JEANETTE MCCOY: Through all of
this that's
going on, the gunshots didn't
stop. They just
didn't stop. I'm still yelling
at the cops
and telling them it made no
sense. I said,
it's one individual in there.
How it is that
there's hundreds of cops out
there and no
one is going in?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But others
believe officials
did the best they could and now
is the time
to focus on the future.
Don Price is helping the city of
Orlando establish
a permanent memorial here in
Greenwood Cemetery.
The city is offering free burial
plots for
any of the victims.
DON PRICE: A lot of these
victims are not
staying in Orlando. They're
being sent home
to Puerto Rico. They're going to
Mexico. They're
going to the Dominican Republic.
They're going
to New Jersey. They're going all
around. Their
friends and their family base is
still here
in Orlando. So we need a place
that the community
can come and grieve.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: DeAngelo Scott
was dancing
that night at Pulse, too, but he
left just
before the attacks began. Six of
his friends
died that night.
He says the so-called Pulse
family, the whole
LGBT community, must come
together to heal
and to lead by example for the
rest of the
city.
DEANGELO SCOTT, Orlando
Resident: We're going
to get fine. We're going to get
through this.
And I was like, we don't really
have a choice.
I was like, because the Pulse
family is what
built the overall Pulse family,
which is the
family we have in the community.
I was like, so we have to make
sure that we
fix ourselves, so that the rest
of us, the
rest of the city, you know, can
look up to
us for support.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's right.
You don't
have a choice.
DEANGELO SCOTT: Yes. Otherwise,
they win.
We can't let them win.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: People seeking
safety in Europe
are now sailing the Western
Mediterranean,
JUDY WOODRUFF: People seeking
safety in Europe
are now sailing the Western
Mediterranean,
after Turkey and the European
Union struck
a deal to stem the refugee flow.
The results have been deadly.
More than 1,000
people have drowned just in the
past several
weeks. And both here and abroad,
the debate
about their fate rages on.
For an update, Gwen Ifill spoke
this week
with Amin Awad. He's the
director Middle East
and North Africa for the U.N.
Refugee Agency,
UNHCR.
GWEN IFILL: Mr. Awad, welcome.
On this program, we have seen
the terrible
stories of the hundreds of
thousands of refugees
coming, especially from the
Mideast and Africa,
trying to get to Greece, trying
to get to
Turkey, trying to get into
Europe.
Has that problem, has it gotten
worse or gotten
better since this whole crisis
began?
AMIN AWAD, United Nations High
Commissioner
for Refugees: I think this
problem of migrants
and refugees and secondary
movement is persisting.
I wouldn't say it's getting
better or it's
getting worse, simply because
the conditions
that people are fleeing are
getting worse.
The serious situation is not
better than it
was before. Cessation of
hostilities ended.
The resumption of fighting
continued. And
as a result, people are fleeing.
The poverty and impoverishment
that people
fleeing sub-Saharan Africa
continue to persist.
There isn't a south-north
collaboration, as
used to be before. People are
fearing -- fleeing
Niger, where there is conflict.
There is poverty.
And they seek opportunity, new
places, market
and labor and mobility.
And some of them are fleeing
conflict, coming
from East Africa, the Horn of
Africa, or the
central part of Africa or the
western part
of Africa. So the root causes
for flight are
still there. And the world has
to come up
with more mechanisms and better
mechanisms
to tackle the root causes of
these conflicts
or poverty.
GWEN IFILL: So the root causes
are still there,
but the welcome mat is not there
anymore.
In fact, it's certainly not
there in Turkey,
and it's certainly not there in
Germany like
it once was. So how does that
affect the flow?
AMIN AWAD: People -- the flow
will persist.
People will continue to try all
they can to
make it to safety, to make it to
better places,
to find opportunity or
protection.
If the welcoming mat is not
there, then there
ought to be equal investment in
the communities
where conflicts are and where
poverty is,
and try to stem the flow in a
more dynamic
and cooperative manner.
But you also have to uphold all
international
instruments, the international
protection,
international national refugee
law, the international
human rights law. We have to
rally around
these and similar, because
that's what makes
the world also orderly.
GWEN IFILL: But you know that,
in this country,
we're having a big presidential
debate which
circles around in part what we
should be,
how many refugees we should be
accepting.
And, in Europe, the vote, the
Brexit about
whether to exit the European
Union to some
degree also centers around that.
Doesn't make your task an uphill
one?
AMIN AWAD: It does in a way,
but, on the other
hand, I think there are also
more people,
be it politician or
constituencies, or outfits,
policy think tanks, politicians,
parliamentarians
or congressmen or senators, who
know, and
they can differentiate between
the political
hype and the xenophobia and the
real issues.
Refugees are fleeing terror.
They are fleeing
radical groups. They are fleeing
conflicts.
And they're looking for safety.
GWEN IFILL: And yet people...
AMIN AWAD: They couldn't be the
people to
blame.
GWEN IFILL: Well, that's exactly
the point,
yet people say that refugees
themselves could
be spreading the terror. That's
the fear.
AMIN AWAD: Well, there isn't --
there are
no guarantees for us to really
think this
is really the truth, nor, if we
look at history
of refugees during the last 200
years, that
they have been carrying attacks
against hosts.
It never happened.
GWEN IFILL: It never happened.
In order for
this to work, you need some
financial resources.
And many nations have pledged
financial resources
to this cause. Have they
fulfilled those promises?
AMIN AWAD: London conference,
February, good
initiative by the U.K. and by
Norway, Kuwait
and others, pledges were made in
good faith,
but they were not made.
GWEN IFILL: How much money are
we talking
about?
AMIN AWAD: We're talking about
$12 billion.
GWEN IFILL: And how much has
been...
AMIN AWAD: Two-point-five.
GWEN IFILL: Two-point-five,
instead of 12?
AMIN AWAD: If we are to
stabilize the world
and the protracted conflicts,
resources have
to be there.
The other problem we have is
protracted conflicts,
they have been open for long,
like never we
have seen before, 60 million
people displaced,
the refugees or IDPs, because of
natural disaster
or conflicts. A lot of
protracted situation,
the world, they could not find
solutions.
I think there ought to be a new
model, an
approach, robust, to bring the
East and the
West together to make sure that
conflicts
are solved. If conflicts are not
solved, the
world will be an unruly place, a
dangerous
place like never before.
GWEN IFILL: That's one end of --
that's the
source of the flood of migrants.
What about what happens on the
other end,
people who fear that their
economies will
be adversely affected, that
their jobs will
be taken?
AMIN AWAD: Stabilize the world.
Find solutions
to natural disaster, conflicts,
and don't
leave protracted situation, open
conflicts.
We have Yemen, Libya, Syria,
South Sudan,
a few places in Central Africa.
GWEN IFILL: Do you see progress
toward that?
AMIN AWAD: We haven't seen.
Frozen conflicts.
More and more people flee. This
is a threat
against political -- our very
stable planet.
It is a threat to international
security.
GWEN IFILL: Frozen conflicts.
Amin Awad, the director of the
Middle East
and North Africa Bureau of the
UNHCR, thank
you very much.
AMIN AWAD: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Several
athletes have decided
not to attend the summer
Olympics in Rio de
Janeiro this August. Some male
competitors
have taken the precaution of
freezing their
sperm in advance of going.
The reason? Zika. Brazil has
been severely
affected by the virus, shown to
cause birth
defects. There have even been
calls among
some in the international
community to move
the Games.
But the World Health
Organization, or WHO,
now says it's safe.
"NewsHour" producer Jon Gerberg
and NPR's
Lulu Garcia-Navarro report now
on Brazilian
reaction to the controversy.
MAN: Hey, man, what's up.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Paulo Cesar
Vieira, known
by his nickname Peanut, is
something of a
celebrity in his favela, or
informal settlement
of Rocinha.
PAULO CESAR VIEIRA, Brazil: I
feel proud.
I am from here, but I am so
proud because,
since kids, I always dreamed to
see my favela
up.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: A community
leader and
a tour guide, he had hoped that
the coming
Olympics would be the next step
in improving
the lives of everyday
Brazilians. But then
Zika happened.
MAN: The Zika virus and its
potentially devastating
consequences continue to spread.
MAN: Growing fears now among
Olympic athletes
and fans worldwide over the
looming threat
of the Zika virus.
WOMAN: Hundreds of thousands of
people traveling
to Brazil this summer for the
Olympics. We
already have a pandemic on our
hands. What
could happen?
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Brazil is
the epicenter
of the mosquito-borne Zika
virus. In advance
of the Rio Games, Olympic
organizers and local
authorities have been spraying
facilities
and struggling to assure the
world that it
is safe for athletes and
tourists to come
here.
A group of international media,
which included
"PBS NewsHour," was invited to
film health
inspectors in Rio's Jacarepagua
neighborhood
last week. Mosquito eradication
measures like
these have been taking place
across the city.
At the local health clinic,
doctors told us
that Zika is a much smaller
problem right
now.
VIVIANE DOS SANTOS, Doctor
(through translator):
In the summer months, we had
more Zika cases,
because we have more mosquitoes.
We had around
10 cases per week. Now we have
seen a decline.
Currently, we have about one
case every 15
days, very little.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Even though
they are
called the Summer Games, they
will be taking
place in South America's winter,
which is
typically cooler with fewer
mosquitoes. One
local resident told us that he's
actually
worried about what other
diseases tourists
and athletes could bring, as
Zika was actually
discovered in the forests of
Uganda.
So, Paulo Jozze (ph) thinks that
actually
the Brazilians are the victims
here. He points
out that the Zika virus actually
arrived in
Brazil from outside of the
country.
But it's the Zika virus that has
overshadowed
the run-up to the Olympics here;
234 scientists
and global health experts
recently wrote a
letter to the World Health
Organization calling
for the Games in Rio to be
canceled, postponed
or even moved. "An unnecessary
risk is posed
when 500,000 foreign tourists
from all countries
attend the Games, potentially
acquire that
strain, and return home to
places where it
can become endemic," it read.
But Rio's mayor, Eduardo Paes,
insisted that
the seasonal decrease in
mosquitoes would
keep the epidemic at bay.
EDUARDO PAES, Mayor of Rio de
Janeiro: This
will not be a problem for the
Games. Obviously,
if you're a pregnant woman, you
need to take
more care of it. But come to
Rio. This will
not be a problem. I'm sure that,
in one year
time, if you come back here, we
will say,
OK, there was no Zika during Rio
Games.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Olympics
spokesman Mario
Andrada echoed that sentiment,
saying the
Olympic venues were undergoing
daily mosquito
inspections.
MARIO ANDRADA, Rio 2016: We are
100 percent
sure that our tourists, our
athletes, our
guests will be safe in Rio. And
we do the
best to protect them.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: The WHO has
agreed and
says there is no reason to move
the Games.
It's issued a series of
guidelines for those
coming to Rio. They include
warnings to pregnant
women and sexually active men.
More controversially, however,
the WHO initially
advised foreign tourists to
avoid visiting
impoverished and overcrowded
areas in cities
and towns with no piped water or
poor sanitation.
BRUCE AYLWARD, World Health
Organization:
It is in the poorer,
impoverished areas where
you're more likely to find still
water or
stagnant water that has
collected rainwater
or whatever is being kept. It is
really just
looking at what factors help
drive the higher
mosquito density, the
probability of getting
bitten by mosquitoes. And that
will be higher
in those areas.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: But some
experts disagree.
The threat of mosquitoes
breeding in dirty,
stagnant water is real. But the
Aedes aegypti
mosquito, which spreads Zika and
dengue, among
other diseases, likes to breed
next to clean
water.
Brazilian biologist Claudia
Codeco is with
Brazil's largest scientific
research center.
She also says, in Rio, rich and
poor live
side by side and mosquitoes
don't respect
class boundaries.
CLAUDIA CODECO, Biologist: We
know from many
studies that these mosquitoes,
they can breed
in any type of environment. So
this is not
a particular problem of poor
areas. It can
actually breed in any type of
environment.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: The concern
among some
in Brazil is that telling people
disease and
the favelas are connected could
prove unnecessarily
harmful to poor and struggling
communities,
which are already stigmatized.
Peanut, our host in Rocinha, is
among those
worried. The sprawling informal
settlement
is the largest in Rio de
Janeiro, home to
tens of thousands of people. And
he was hoping
to introduce tourists to his
favela.
PAULO CESAR VIEIRA: People in
other countries
have totally bad information
about us. You
know, it's important we take
them and they
see the reality of favela.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: And what is
the reality?
PAULO CESAR VIEIRA: The reality
is the people.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Peanut
showed us an herb
called arruda, which has a
pungent smell.
He buys from local vendors and
wears it to
ward off the mosquitoes.
With regard to his tourism
business, he says
his hopes are not high. He
blames what he
calls propaganda in the
international press.
PAULO CESAR VIEIRA: I hope many
tourists come.
But I don't believe it much,
because they
have very strong propaganda all
over the world:
Don't come to Rio. Don't come to
Colombia.
Don't come this -- don't come to
South America,
because they have Zika.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: He says his
own message
is very different.
PAULO CESAR VIEIRA: Come to the
Olympics.
Come to the favela. And have a
good time.
I know nothing bad will happen
with you.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: But not
everyone is so
sure, including those who have
dealt with
the virus' most harmful effects.
Pollyana Rabello's son, Luis
Felipe, was born
with Zika-related microcephaly,
a condition
where children are born with
small heads because
the brain is underdeveloped. She
says many
mothers who've had children with
congenital
Zika syndrome in Brazil have
been getting
little government financial or
medical help,
despite many promises.
POLLYANA RABELLO, Mother of
Child with Microcephaly
(through translator): If our
country is unable
support its own people, who are
Brazilians,
who pay taxes, why bring others
if you can't
even support these people?
Zika hasn't gone away. It is
here. And if
it happened to us, it can happen
to many more
people. I think the Games
shouldn't happen.
I think this money they are
investing in the
Olympics should be invested in
the health
and well-being of the Brazilian
population.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: A
desperately needed
investment in the lives of the
people, who
will still have to grapple with
Zika when
the Olympics are just a memory.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lulu
Garcia-Navarro
of NPR, Rio de Janeiro.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tune in
tomorrow, when we
hear from local residents on the
story behind
Brazil's polluted waters, where
some Olympic
competition will take place.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another in
our Brief
But Spectacular series, where we
ask interesting
people to describe their
passions.
Comedian Negin Farsad describes
how she uses
comedy to fight bigotry. Her
latest book,
"How to Make White People
Laugh," was released
earlier this month.
NEGIN FARSAD, Comedian: I'm an
Iranian-American
Muslim lady, and, as such,
growing up, I didn't
really have any icons to look up
to.
I yearned to be Mexican because
there were
so many Mexicans in our schools,
and they
had issues and icons like Cesar
Chavez, and
everyone could say their names
like Aralia
and Rodrigo.
And then, with me, they just --
they were
just like, Megan, Megrime?
I grew up in Palm Springs,
California, and
Palm Springs is a really weird
place. It's
simultaneously like one of the
top five retirement
communities and also one of the
top five gay
cities in California. It's the
kind of place
where you will see people
dancing to Lady
Gaga while adjusting their
catheters.
One of the main problems of
being a Muz in
today's world is that people
immediately conflate
that with terrorism and
violence. I'm like
5'3-and-a-half, and I dress like
a cartoon
character.
And I ended up getting a
master's degree in
African-American studies. I was
the only non-black
person in the department. The
purple represents
all the black students, and then
the non-purple
part is the me. People were sort
of like,
it's weird that -- don't you
have your own
people?
And I would be like, how could
you say that?
I will fight for
African-American rights whenever
and wherever. I have a DVD box
set of "A Different
World" on my backpack. I'm about
to change
my name to Tyler Perry Presents
Negin Farsad.
At a certain point, I sort of
realized, you
know -- and this is well after
9/11 -- that
like I do have my own people.
Islamophobia
is on the rise. And there's
actually something
I can do about it, comedy but
about stuff
that mattered and had some kind
of social
impact.
I wrote a musical called "The
Israeli Palestinian
Conflict: A Romantic Comedy." I
made a feature
documentary comedy called "The
Muslims Are
Coming." I basically rounded up
a bunch of
Muslim-American comedians in a
nonviolent
way, and we went around the
country to places
like Tennessee and Alabama and
Georgia, and
places where they love the
Muzzies. And we
did these stand-up shows.
"How to Make White People Laugh"
is a memoir
meets social justice comedy
manifesto. I talk
about being Iranian. I talk
about Islamophobia.
I talk about xenophobia. I talk
about being
a brown lady dating online.
There are some
really earth-shattering chapters
in it, like
the one called "Immigrants Spit
Out More Patriotic
Babies."
My parents are immigrants, and
they raised,
like, an uber-dorky patriot who
had a giant
American flag in her bedroom all
growing up.
That's how in love with the
country I was
raised to be.
So, I feel like, every time I
take the stage,
I have to announce to everybody,
hey, I'm
an Iranian-American Muslim
female, like all
of you, and just to calm people
down that,
like, I know that you know that
this is not
the normal package for a
comedian, and it's
going to be OK.
My name is Negin Farsad, and
this is my Brief
But Spectacular take on being an
Iranian-American
Muslim female comedian lady.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She's a winner.
HARI SREENIVASAN: She's got
enough adjectives
at the end there, yes.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: You can watch
more episodes
of our Brief But Spectacular
series on our
Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
Also online, a new computer
algorithm may
help stop terrorist attacks. By
charting pro-ISIS
groups on social media,
scientists found it
might be possible to predict
real-life risks,
even without explicit messages.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And that's the
"NewsHour"
for tonight. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.